assets/chezmoi.io/docs/reference/special-files/chezmoiexternal-format.md, before:

# `.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT{,.tmpl}`

If a file called `.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` (with an optional `.tmpl` extension)
exists anywhere in the source state (either `~/.local/share/chezmoi` or
directory defined inside `.chezmoiroot`), it is interpreted as a list of
external files and archives to be included as if they were in the source state.
See also [`.chezmoiexternals/` directories][external-dir].

`$FORMAT` must be one of chezmoi's supported configuration file formats.

--8<-- "config-format.md"

`.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` is interpreted as a template, whether or not it has a
`.tmpl` extension. This allows different externals to be included on different
machines.

If a `.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` file is located in an ignored directory (one
listed in [`.chezmoiignore`][ignore]), all entries within the file are also
ignored.

Entries are indexed by target name relative to the directory of the
`.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` file, and must have a `type` and a `url` and/or a
`urls` field. `type` can be either `file`, `archive`, `archive-file`, or
`git-repo`. If the entry's parent directories do not already exist in the source
state then chezmoi will create them as regular directories.

Entries may have the following fields:

| Variable                     | Type     | Default value | Description                                                      |
| ---------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `type`                       | string   | *none*        | External type (`file`, `archive`, `archive-file`, or `git-repo`) |
| `decompress`                 | string   | *none*        | Decompression for file                                           |
| `encrypted`                  | bool     | `false`       | Whether the external is encrypted                                |
| `exact`                      | bool     | `false`       | Add `exact_` attribute to directories in archive                 |
| `exclude`                    | []string | *none*        | Patterns to exclude from archive                                 |
| `executable`                 | bool     | `false`       | Add `executable_` attribute to file                              |
| `private`                    | bool     | `false`       | Add `private_` attribute to file                                 |
| `readonly`                   | bool     | `false`       | Add `readonly_` attribute to file                                |
| `format`                     | string   | *autodetect*  | Format of archive                                                |
| `path`                       | string   | *none*        | Path to file in archive                                          |
| `include`                    | []string | *none*        | Patterns to include from archive                                 |
| `refreshPeriod`              | duration | `0`           | Refresh period                                                   |
| `stripComponents`            | int      | `0`           | Number of leading directory components to strip from archives    |
| `url`                        | string   | *none*        | URL                                                              |
| `urls`                       | []string | *none*        | Extra URLs to try, in order                                      |
| `checksum.sha256`            | string   | *none*        | Expected SHA256 checksum of data                                 |
| `checksum.sha384`            | string   | *none*        | Expected SHA384 checksum of data                                 |
| `checksum.sha512`            | string   | *none*        | Expected SHA512 checksum of data                                 |
| `checksum.size`              | int      | *none*        | Expected size of data                                            |
| `clone.args`                 | []string | *none*        | Extra args to `git clone`                                        |
| `filter.command`             | string   | *none*        | Command to filter contents                                       |
| `filter.args`                | []string | *none*        | Extra args to command to filter contents                         |
| `pull.args`                  | []string | *none*        | Extra args to `git pull`                                         |
| `archive.extractAppleDouble` | bool     | `false`       | If `true`, AppleDouble files are extracted                       |

`url` must be an `https://`, `http://`, or `file://` URL. If `urls` is specified
then they are tried in order and the first URL that succeeds is used.

If any of the optional `checksum.sha256`, `checksum.sha384`, or
`checksum.sha512` fields are set, chezmoi will verify that the downloaded data
has the given checksum.

The optional boolean `encrypted` field specifies whether the file or archive is
encrypted.

The optional string `decompress` specifies how the file should be decompressed.
Supported compression formats are `bzip2`, `gzip`, `xz`, and `zstd`. Note the
`.rar` and `.zip` files are archives and you must use the `archive-file` type to
extract a single file from a `.rar` or `.zip` archive.

If optional string `filter.command` and array of strings `filter.args` are
specified, the file or archive is filtered by piping it into the command's
standard input and reading the command's standard output.

If `type` is `file` then the target is a file with the contents of `url`. The
optional boolean field `executable` may be set, in which case the target file
will be executable.

If `type` is `archive` then the target is a directory with the contents of the
archive at `url`. The optional boolean field `exact` may be set, in which case
the directory and all subdirectories will be treated as exact directories, i.e.
`chezmoi apply` will remove entries not present in the archive. The optional
integer field `stripComponents` will remove leading path components from the
members of archive. The optional string field `format` sets the archive format.
The supported archive formats are `tar`, `tar.gz`, `tgz`, `tar.bz2`, `tbz2`,
`xz`, `.tar.zst`, and `zip`. If `format` is not specified then chezmoi will
guess the format using firstly the path of the URL and secondly its contents.

When `type` is `archive` or `archive-file`, the optional setting
`archive.extractAppleDouble` controls whether [AppleDouble][appledouble] files
are extracted. It is `false` by default, so AppleDouble files will not be
extracted.

The optional `include` and `exclude` fields are lists of patterns specify which
archive members to include or exclude respectively. Patterns match paths in the
archive, not the target state. chezmoi uses the following algorithm to determine
whether an archive member is included:

1. If the archive member name matches any `exclude` pattern, then the archive
   member is excluded. In addition, if the archive member is a directory, then
   all contained files and sub-directories will be excluded, too (recursively).
2. Otherwise, if the archive member name matches any `include` pattern, then the
   archive member is included.
3. Otherwise, if only `include` patterns were specified then the archive member
   is excluded.
4. Otherwise, if only `exclude` patterns were specified then the archive member
   is included.
5. Otherwise, the archive member is included.

Excluded archive members do not generate source state entries, and, if they are
directories, all of their children are also excluded.

If `type` is `archive-file` then the target is a file or symlink with the
contents of the entry `path` in the archive at `url`. The optional integer field
`stripComponents` will remove leading path components from the members of the
archive before comparing them with `path`. The behavior of `format` is the same
as for `archive`. If `executable` is `true` then chezmoi will set the executable
bits on the target file, even if they are not set in the archive.

!!! info

    Be sure to check that you have the correct `path` for the file in your archive.
    You can use your archive tooling to check for the correct paths.  For example:

    ```console
    $ tar tzf eza_x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu.tar.gz
    ./eza
    $ tar tzf zellij-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz
    zellij
    ```

    Notice how `path = "zellij"` in the configuration does not include a leading `./`.

    ```toml title="~/.local/share/chezmoi/.chezmoiexternal.toml"
    [".local/bin/zellij"]
        type = "archive-file"
        url = {{ gitHubLatestReleaseAssetURL "zellij-org/zellij" "zellij-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz" | quote }}
        executable = true
        path = "zellij"
    [".local/bin/eza"]
        type = "archive-file"
        url = {{ gitHubLatestReleaseAssetURL "eza-community/eza" "eza_x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu.tar.gz" | quote }}
        executable = true
        path = "./eza"
    ```

If `type` is `git-repo` then chezmoi will run `git clone $URL $TARGET_NAME` with
the optional `clone.args` if the target does not exist. If the target exists,
then chezmoi will run `git pull` with the optional `pull.args` to update the
target.

For `file` and `archive` externals, chezmoi will cache downloaded URLs. The
optional duration `refreshPeriod` field specifies how often chezmoi will
re-download the URL. The default is zero meaning that chezmoi will never
re-download unless forced. To force chezmoi to re-download URLs, pass the
`-R`/`--refresh-externals` flag. Suitable refresh periods include one day
(`24h`), one week (`168h`), or four weeks (`672h`).

!!! example

    ```toml title="~/.local/share/chezmoi/.chezmoiexternal.toml"
    [".vim/autoload/plug.vim"]
        type = "file"
        url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/junegunn/vim-plug/master/plug.vim"
        refreshPeriod = "168h"
    [".oh-my-zsh"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/archive/master.tar.gz"
        exact = true
        stripComponents = 1
        refreshPeriod = "168h"
    [".oh-my-zsh/custom/plugins/zsh-syntax-highlighting"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://github.com/zsh-users/zsh-syntax-highlighting/archive/master.tar.gz"
        exact = true
        stripComponents = 1
        refreshPeriod = "168h"
    [".oh-my-zsh/custom/themes/powerlevel10k"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://github.com/romkatv/powerlevel10k/archive/v1.15.0.tar.gz"
        exact = true
        stripComponents = 1
    [".local/bin/age"]
        type = "archive-file"
        url = "https://github.com/FiloSottile/age/releases/download/v1.1.1/age-v1.1.1-{{ .chezmoi.os }}-{{ .chezmoi.arch }}.tar.gz"
        path = "age/age"
    ["www/adminer/plugins"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://api.github.com/repos/vrana/adminer/tarball"
        refreshPeriod = "744h"
        stripComponents = 2
        include = ["*/plugins/**"]
    ```

    Some more examples can be found in the [user guide][elsewhere].

!!! info

    Externals may be set up with a private Git repository. This must be done
    with an SSH URL. The SSH key should be configured in a `before_` script;
    and possible errors can be avoided by using [`stat`][stat]:

    ```toml title="~/.local/share/chezmoi/.chezmoiexternal.toml"
    {{ if stat (joinPath .chezmoi.homeDir ".ssh" "id_rsa") }}
    [".path/to/private/repo"]
    type = "git-repo"
    url = "git@private.com:org/repo.git"
    {{ end }}
    ```

[ignore]: /reference/special-files/chezmoiignore.md
[external-dir]: /reference/special-directories/chezmoiexternals.md
[elsewhere]: /user-guide/include-files-from-elsewhere.md
[appledouble]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AppleSingle_and_AppleDouble_formats
[stat]: /reference/templates/functions/stat.md

Commit message:

feat: Add support for specifying a SHA with git-repo

assets/chezmoi.io/docs/reference/special-files/chezmoiexternal-format.md, after:

# `.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT{,.tmpl}`

If a file called `.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` (with an optional `.tmpl` extension)
exists anywhere in the source state (either `~/.local/share/chezmoi` or
directory defined inside `.chezmoiroot`), it is interpreted as a list of
external files and archives to be included as if they were in the source state.
See also [`.chezmoiexternals/` directories][external-dir].

`$FORMAT` must be one of chezmoi's supported configuration file formats.

--8<-- "config-format.md"

`.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` is interpreted as a template, whether or not it has a
`.tmpl` extension. This allows different externals to be included on different
machines.

If a `.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` file is located in an ignored directory (one
listed in [`.chezmoiignore`][ignore]), all entries within the file are also
ignored.

Entries are indexed by target name relative to the directory of the
`.chezmoiexternal.$FORMAT` file, and must have a `type` and a `url` and/or a
`urls` field. `type` can be either `file`, `archive`, `archive-file`, or
`git-repo`. If the entry's parent directories do not already exist in the source
state then chezmoi will create them as regular directories.

Entries may have the following fields:

| Variable                     | Type     | Default value | Description                                                      |
| ---------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `type`                       | string   | *none*        | External type (`file`, `archive`, `archive-file`, or `git-repo`) |
| `decompress`                 | string   | *none*        | Decompression for file                                           |
| `encrypted`                  | bool     | `false`       | Whether the external is encrypted                                |
| `exact`                      | bool     | `false`       | Add `exact_` attribute to directories in archive                 |
| `exclude`                    | []string | *none*        | Patterns to exclude from archive                                 |
| `executable`                 | bool     | `false`       | Add `executable_` attribute to file                              |
| `private`                    | bool     | `false`       | Add `private_` attribute to file                                 |
| `readonly`                   | bool     | `false`       | Add `readonly_` attribute to file                                |
| `format`                     | string   | *autodetect*  | Format of archive                                                |
| `path`                       | string   | *none*        | Path to file in archive                                          |
| `include`                    | []string | *none*        | Patterns to include from archive                                 |
| `refreshPeriod`              | duration | `0`           | Refresh period                                                   |
| `stripComponents`            | int      | `0`           | Number of leading directory components to strip from archives    |
| `url`                        | string   | *none*        | URL                                                              |
| `urls`                       | []string | *none*        | Extra URLs to try, in order                                      |
| `checksum.sha256`            | string   | *none*        | Expected SHA256 checksum of data                                 |
| `checksum.sha384`            | string   | *none*        | Expected SHA384 checksum of data                                 |
| `checksum.sha512`            | string   | *none*        | Expected SHA512 checksum of data                                 |
| `checksum.size`              | int      | *none*        | Expected size of data                                            |
| `clone.args`                 | []string | *none*        | Extra args to `git clone`                                        |
| `commit`                     | string   | *none*        | Git commit SHA to checkout for `git-repo` type                   |
| `filter.command`             | string   | *none*        | Command to filter contents                                       |
| `filter.args`                | []string | *none*        | Extra args to command to filter contents                         |
| `pull.args`                  | []string | *none*        | Extra args to `git pull`                                         |
| `archive.extractAppleDouble` | bool     | `false`       | If `true`, AppleDouble files are extracted                       |

`url` must be an `https://`, `http://`, or `file://` URL. If `urls` is specified
then they are tried in order and the first URL that succeeds is used.

If any of the optional `checksum.sha256`, `checksum.sha384`, or
`checksum.sha512` fields are set, chezmoi will verify that the downloaded data
has the given checksum.

The optional boolean `encrypted` field specifies whether the file or archive is
encrypted.

The optional string `decompress` specifies how the file should be decompressed.
Supported compression formats are `bzip2`, `gzip`, `xz`, and `zstd`. Note the
`.rar` and `.zip` files are archives and you must use the `archive-file` type to
extract a single file from a `.rar` or `.zip` archive.

If optional string `filter.command` and array of strings `filter.args` are
specified, the file or archive is filtered by piping it into the command's
standard input and reading the command's standard output.

If `type` is `file` then the target is a file with the contents of `url`. The
optional boolean field `executable` may be set, in which case the target file
will be executable.

If `type` is `archive` then the target is a directory with the contents of the
archive at `url`. The optional boolean field `exact` may be set, in which case
the directory and all subdirectories will be treated as exact directories, i.e.
`chezmoi apply` will remove entries not present in the archive. The optional
integer field `stripComponents` will remove leading path components from the
members of archive. The optional string field `format` sets the archive format.
The supported archive formats are `tar`, `tar.gz`, `tgz`, `tar.bz2`, `tbz2`,
`xz`, `.tar.zst`, and `zip`. If `format` is not specified then chezmoi will
guess the format using firstly the path of the URL and secondly its contents.

When `type` is `archive` or `archive-file`, the optional setting
`archive.extractAppleDouble` controls whether [AppleDouble][appledouble] files
are extracted. It is `false` by default, so AppleDouble files will not be
extracted.

The optional `include` and `exclude` fields are lists of patterns specify which
archive members to include or exclude respectively. Patterns match paths in the
archive, not the target state. chezmoi uses the following algorithm to determine
whether an archive member is included:

1. If the archive member name matches any `exclude` pattern, then the archive
   member is excluded. In addition, if the archive member is a directory, then
   all contained files and sub-directories will be excluded, too (recursively).
2. Otherwise, if the archive member name matches any `include` pattern, then the
   archive member is included.
3. Otherwise, if only `include` patterns were specified then the archive member
   is excluded.
4. Otherwise, if only `exclude` patterns were specified then the archive member
   is included.
5. Otherwise, the archive member is included.

Excluded archive members do not generate source state entries, and, if they are
directories, all of their children are also excluded.

If `type` is `archive-file` then the target is a file or symlink with the
contents of the entry `path` in the archive at `url`. The optional integer field
`stripComponents` will remove leading path components from the members of the
archive before comparing them with `path`. The behavior of `format` is the same
as for `archive`. If `executable` is `true` then chezmoi will set the executable
bits on the target file, even if they are not set in the archive.

!!! info

    Be sure to check that you have the correct `path` for the file in your archive.
    You can use your archive tooling to check for the correct paths.  For example:

    ```console
    $ tar tzf eza_x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu.tar.gz
    ./eza
    $ tar tzf zellij-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz
    zellij
    ```

    Notice how `path = "zellij"` in the configuration does not include a leading `./`.

    ```toml title="~/.local/share/chezmoi/.chezmoiexternal.toml"
    [".local/bin/zellij"]
        type = "archive-file"
        url = {{ gitHubLatestReleaseAssetURL "zellij-org/zellij" "zellij-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz" | quote }}
        executable = true
        path = "zellij"
    [".local/bin/eza"]
        type = "archive-file"
        url = {{ gitHubLatestReleaseAssetURL "eza-community/eza" "eza_x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu.tar.gz" | quote }}
        executable = true
        path = "./eza"
    ```

If `type` is `git-repo` then chezmoi will run `git clone $URL $TARGET_NAME` with
the optional `clone.args` if the target does not exist. If the target exists,
then chezmoi will run `git pull` with the optional `pull.args` to update the
target.

For `file` and `archive` externals, chezmoi will cache downloaded URLs. The
optional duration `refreshPeriod` field specifies how often chezmoi will
re-download the URL. The default is zero meaning that chezmoi will never
re-download unless forced. To force chezmoi to re-download URLs, pass the
`-R`/`--refresh-externals` flag. Suitable refresh periods include one day
(`24h`), one week (`168h`), or four weeks (`672h`).

!!! example

    ```toml title="~/.local/share/chezmoi/.chezmoiexternal.toml"
    [".vim/autoload/plug.vim"]
        type = "file"
        url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/junegunn/vim-plug/master/plug.vim"
        refreshPeriod = "168h"
    [".oh-my-zsh"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/archive/master.tar.gz"
        exact = true
        stripComponents = 1
        refreshPeriod = "168h"
    [".oh-my-zsh/custom/plugins/zsh-syntax-highlighting"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://github.com/zsh-users/zsh-syntax-highlighting/archive/master.tar.gz"
        exact = true
        stripComponents = 1
        refreshPeriod = "168h"
    [".oh-my-zsh/custom/themes/powerlevel10k"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://github.com/romkatv/powerlevel10k/archive/v1.15.0.tar.gz"
        exact = true
        stripComponents = 1
    [".local/bin/age"]
        type = "archive-file"
        url = "https://github.com/FiloSottile/age/releases/download/v1.1.1/age-v1.1.1-{{ .chezmoi.os }}-{{ .chezmoi.arch }}.tar.gz"
        path = "age/age"
    ["www/adminer/plugins"]
        type = "archive"
        url = "https://api.github.com/repos/vrana/adminer/tarball"
        refreshPeriod = "744h"
        stripComponents = 2
        include = ["*/plugins/**"]
    ```

    Some more examples can be found in the [user guide][elsewhere].

!!! info

    Externals may be set up with a private Git repository. This must be done
    with an SSH URL. The SSH key should be configured in a `before_` script;
    and possible errors can be avoided by using [`stat`][stat]:

    ```toml title="~/.local/share/chezmoi/.chezmoiexternal.toml"
    {{ if stat (joinPath .chezmoi.homeDir ".ssh" "id_rsa") }}
    [".path/to/private/repo"]
    type = "git-repo"
    url = "git@private.com:org/repo.git"
    {{ end }}
    ```

[ignore]: /reference/special-files/chezmoiignore.md
[external-dir]: /reference/special-directories/chezmoiexternals.md
[elsewhere]: /user-guide/include-files-from-elsewhere.md
[appledouble]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AppleSingle_and_AppleDouble_formats
[stat]: /reference/templates/functions/stat.md
