assets/chezmoi.io/docs/reference/configuration-file/index.md, before:

# Configuration file

chezmoi searches for its configuration file according to the [XDG Base
Directory
Specification](https://standards.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/basedir-spec-latest.html)
and supports [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html), JSONC,
[TOML](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml), and [YAML](https://yaml.org/). The
basename of the config file is `chezmoi`, and the first config file found is
used.

In most installations, the config file will be read from
`~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.$FORMAT`, where `$FORMAT` is one of `json`, `toml`,
or `yaml`. The config file can be set explicitly with the `--config` command
line option. By default, the format is detected based on the extension of the
config file name, but can be overridden with the `--config-format` command line
option.


## Examples

=== "JSON"

    ```json title="~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.json"
    {
        "sourceDir": "/home/user/.dotfiles",
        "git": {
            "autoPush": true
        }
    }
    ```

=== "TOML"

    ```toml title="~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.toml"
    sourceDir = "/home/user/.dotfiles"
    [git]
        autoPush = true
    ```

=== "YAML"

    ```yaml title="~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.yaml"
    sourceDir: /home/user/.dotfiles
    git:
        autoPush: true
    ```

Commit message:

feat: Find config file with $CHEZMOI_CONFIG
Resolves #2771

When `$CHEZMOI_CONFIG` to be set, chezmoi will act as if it were called
with `chezmoi --config $CHEZMOI_CONFIG`. If both `$CHEZMOI_CONFIG` and
`--config PATH-TO-CONFIG` are provided, the command-line flag wins.

assets/chezmoi.io/docs/reference/configuration-file/index.md, after:

# Configuration file

chezmoi searches for its configuration file according to the [XDG Base Directory
Specification](https://standards.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/basedir-spec-latest.html)
and supports [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html), JSONC,
[TOML](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml), and [YAML](https://yaml.org/). The
basename of the config file is `chezmoi`. If multiple configuration file formats
are present, chezmoi will report an error.

In most installations, the config file will be read from
`$HOME/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.$FORMAT`
(`%USERPROFILE%/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.$FORMAT`), where `$FORMAT` is one of
`json`, `jsonc`, `toml`, or `yaml`. The config file can be set explicitly with
the `--config` command line option or the environment variable
`$CHEZMOI_CONFIG`. By default, the format is detected based on the extension of
the config file name, but can be overridden with the `--config-format` command
line option.

## Examples

=== "JSON"

    ```json title="~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.json"
    {
        "sourceDir": "/home/user/.dotfiles",
        "git": {
            "autoPush": true
        }
    }
    ```

=== "TOML"

    ```toml title="~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.toml"
    sourceDir = "/home/user/.dotfiles"
    [git]
        autoPush = true
    ```

=== "YAML"

    ```yaml title="~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.yaml"
    sourceDir: /home/user/.dotfiles
    git:
        autoPush: true
    ```
